Diagnosing performance changes by comparing request flows
Raja R. Sambasivan⋆ , Alice X. Zheng† , Michael De Rosa‡ , Elie Krevat⋆ ,
Spencer Whitman⋆ , Michael Stroucken⋆ , William Wang⋆ , Lianghong Xu⋆ , Gregory R. Ganger⋆
⋆ Carnegie Mellon University, † Microsoft Research, ‡ Google

Abstract
The causes of performance changes in a distributed
system often elude even its developers. This paper develops a new technique for gaining insight into such
changes: comparing request flows from two executions
(e.g., of two system versions or time periods). Building on end-to-end request-flow tracing within and across
components, algorithms are described for identifying and
ranking changes in the flow and/or timing of request processing. The implementation of these algorithms in a
tool called Spectroscope is evaluated. Six case studies
are presented of using Spectroscope to diagnose performance changes in a distributed storage service caused by
code changes, configuration modifications, and component degradations, demonstrating the value and efficacy
of comparing request flows. Preliminary experiences
of using Spectroscope to diagnose performance changes
within select Google services are also presented.

1

Introduction

Diagnosing performance problems in distributed systems
is difficult. Such problems may have many sources and
may be contained in any one or more of the component
processes or, more insidiously, may emerge from the interactions among them [21]. A suite of debugging tools
is needed to help in identifying and understanding the
root causes of the diverse types of performance problems that can arise. In contrast to single-process applications, for which diverse performance debugging tools
exist (e.g., DTrace [6], gprof [14], and GDB [12]), too
few techniques have been developed for guiding diagnosis of distributed system performance.
Recent research has developed promising new techniques that can help populate the suite. Many build on
low-overhead end-to-end tracing (e.g., [4, 7, 9, 11, 31,
34]), which captures the flow (i.e., path and timing) of
individual requests within and across the components of
a distributed system. For example, with such rich information about a system’s operation, researchers have developed new techniques for detecting anomalous request
flows [4], spotting large-scale departures from performance models [33], and comparing observed behaviour
to manually-constructed expectations [26].
This paper develops a new technique for the suite:
comparing request flows between two executions to identify why performance has changed between them. Such
comparison allows one execution to serve as a model
of acceptable performance; highlighting key differences

from this model and understanding their performance
costs allows for easier diagnosis than when only a single
execution is used. Though obtaining an execution of acceptable performance may not be possible in all cases,
e.g., when a developer wants to understand why performance has always been poor, there are many cases for
which request-flow comparison is useful. For example,
it can help diagnose performance changes resulting from
modifications made during software development (e.g.,
during regular regression testing) or from upgrades to
components of a deployed system. Also, it can help
when diagnosing changes over time in a deployed system, which may result from component degradations, resource leakage, or workload changes.
Our analysis of bug tracking data for a distributed storage service indicates that more than half of the reported
performance problems would benefit from guidance provided by comparing request flows. Talks with Google
engineers [3] and experiences using request-flow comparison to diagnose Google services affirm its utility.
The utility of comparing request flows relies on the
observation that performance changes often manifest as
changes in how requests are serviced. When comparing
two executions, which we refer to as the non-problem
period (before the change) and the problem period (after
the change), there will usually be some changes in the
observed request flows. We refer to new request flows
in the problem period as mutations and to the request
flows corresponding to how they were serviced in the
non-problem period as precursors. Identifying mutations
and comparing them to their precursors helps localize
sources of change and gives insight into their effects.
This paper describes algorithms for effectively comparing request flows across periods, including for identifying mutations, ranking them based on their contribution to the overall performance change, identifying their
most likely precursors, highlighting the most prominent
divergences, and identifying low-level parameter differences that most strongly correlate to each.
We categorize mutations into two types: Responsetime mutations correspond to requests that have increased only in cost between the periods; their precursors
are requests that exhibit the same structure, but whose response time is different. Structural mutations correspond
to requests that take different paths through the system in
the problem period. Identifying their precursors requires
analysis of all request flows with differing frequencies in
the two periods.

Figure 1 illustrates a (mocked up) example of two mutations and their precursors. Ranking and highlighting
divergences involves using statistical tests and comparison of mutations and associated precursors.
We have implemented request-flow comparison in a
toolset called Spectroscope and used it to diagnose performance problems observed in Ursa Minor [1], a distributed storage service. By describing five real problems
and one synthetic one, we illustrate the utility of comparing request flows and show that our algorithms enable
effective use of this technique. To understand challenges
associated with scaling request-flow comparison to very
large distributed systems, this paper also describes preliminary experiences using it to diagnose performance
changes within distributed services at Google.

2

Precursor

Mutation

Precursor

Mutation

Read

Read

Write

Write

10 4s

10 4s

20 4s
Cache

hit

20 4s

Cache
miss
10 4s

100 4s

Reply

Start
5,000 4s

Rank: 1
Requests: 7,000
Type: Structural

End
100 4s

Reply

Start

Start Start

5,000 4s

5,000 4s

End End
End
10 4s
10 4s

Reply

Start

End
2,000 4s

Reply

Rank: 2
Requests: 5,000
Type: Response time

Figure 1: Example output from comparing request flows.
The two mutations shown are ranked by their effect on the
change in performance. The item ranked first is a structural
mutation and the item ranked second is a response-time mutation. Due to space constraints, mocked-up graphs are shown in
which nodes represent the type of component accessed.

End-to-end request-flow tracing

Request-flow comparison builds on end-to-end tracing,
an invaluable information source that captures a distributed system’s performance and control flow in detail.
Such tracing works by capturing activity records at each
of various trace points within the distributed system’s
software, with each record identifying the specific tracepoint name, the current time, and other contextual information. Most implementations associate activity records
with individual requests by propagating a per-request
identifier, which is stored within the record. Activity
records can be stitched together, either offline or online,
to yield request-flow graphs, which show the control flow
of individual requests. Several efforts, including Magpie [4], Whodunit [7], Pinpoint [9], X-Trace [10, 11],
Google’s Dapper [31], and Stardust [34] have independently implemented such tracing and shown that it can be
used continuously with low overhead, especially when
request sampling is supported [10, 28, 31]. For example,
Stardust [34], Ursa Minor’s end-to-end tracing mechanism, adds 1% or less overhead when used with key
benchmarks, such as SpecSFS [30].
End-to-end tracing implementations differ in two key
respects: whether instrumentation is added automatically
or manually and whether the request flows can disambiguate sequential and parallel activity. With regard to
the latter, Magpie [4] and recent versions of both Stardust [34] and X-Trace [10] explicitly account for concurrency by embedding information about thread synchronization in their traces (see Figure 2). These implementations are a natural fit for request-flow comparison, as
they can disambiguate true structural differences from
false ones caused by alternate interleavings of concurrent
activity. Whodunit [7], Pinpoint [9], and Dapper [31] do
not account for parallelism.
End-to-end tracing in distributed systems is past the
research stage. For example, it is used in production
Google datacenters [31] and in some production three-

tier systems [4]. Research continues, however, on how to
best exploit the information provided by such tracing.

3

Behavioural changes vs. anomalies

Our technique of comparing request flows between two
periods identifies distribution changes in request-flow
behaviour and ranks them according to their contribution to the observed performance difference. Conversely,
anomaly detection techniques, as implemented by Magpie [4] and Pinpoint [9], mine a single period’s request
flows to identify rare ones that differ greatly from others. In contrast to request-flow comparison, which attempts to identify the most important differences between two sets, anomaly detection attempts to identify
rare elements within a single set.
Request-flow comparison and anomaly detection serve
distinct purposes, yet both are useful. For example, performance problems caused by changes in the components used (e.g., see Section 8.2), or by common requests
whose response times have increased slightly, can be easily diagnosed by comparing request flows, whereas many
anomaly detection techniques will be unable to provide
guidance. In the former case, guidance will be difficult because the changed behaviour is common during
the problem period; in the latter, because the per-request
change is not extreme enough.

4

Spectroscope

To illustrate the utility of comparing request flows, this
technique was implemented in a tool called Spectroscope
and used to diagnose performance problems seen in Ursa
Minor [1] and in certain Google services. This section
provides an overview of Spectroscope, and the next describes its algorithms. Section 4.1 describes how cate2

time, and variance. To identify where time is spent, it
also computes average edge latencies and corresponding variances. Spectroscope displays categories in either a graph view, with statistical information overlaid,
or within train-schedule visualizations [37] (also known
as swim lanes), which more directly show the constituent
requests’ pattern of activity.
Spectroscope uses selection criteria to limit the number of categories developers must examine. For example, when comparing request flows, statistical tests and
a ranking scheme are used. The number of categories
could be further reduced by using unsupervised clustering algorithms, such as those used in Magpie [4], to
bin similar but not necessarily identical requests into the
same category. Initial versions of Spectroscope used
off-the-shelf clustering algorithms [29], but we found
the groups they created too coarse-grained and unpredictable. Often, they would group mutations and precursors within the same category, masking their existence. For clustering algorithms to be useful, improvements such as distance metrics that better align with developers’ notions of request similarity are needed. Without them, use of clustering algorithms will result in categories composed of seemingly dissimilar requests.

Figure 2: Example request-flow graph. The graph shows
a striped READ in the Ursa Minor distributed storage system.
Nodes represent trace points and edges are labeled with the
time between successive events. Parallel substructures show
concurrent threads of activity. Node labels are constructed by
concatenating the machine name (e.g., e10), component name
(e.g., NFS3), trace-point name (e.g., READ CALL TYPE), and an
optional semantic label (e.g., NFSCACHE READ MISS). Due to
space constraints, trace points executed on other components
as a result of the NFS server’s RPC calls are not shown.

4.2

Performance changes can result from a variety of factors,
such as internal changes to the system that result in performance regressions, unintended side effects of changes
to configuration files, or environmental issues. Spectroscope helps diagnose these problems by comparing request flows and identifying the key resulting mutations.
Figure 3 shows Spectroscope’s workflow.
When comparing request flows, Spectroscope takes as
input request-flow graphs from two periods of activity,
which we refer to as a non-problem period and a problem period. It creates categories composed of requests
from both periods and uses statistical tests and heuristics
to identify which contain structural mutations, responsetime mutations, or precursors. Categories containing mutations are presented to the developer in a list ranked by
expected contribution to the performance change. Note
that the periods do not need to be aligned exactly with
the performance change (e.g., at Google we often chose
day-long periods based on historic average latencies).
Visualizations of categories that contain mutations
are similar to those described previously, except perperiod statistical information is shown. The root cause
of response-time mutations is localized by showing the
edges responsible for the mutation in red. The root cause
of structural mutations is localized by providing a ranked
list of the candidate precursors, so that the developer can
determine how they differ. Figure 1 shows an example.
Spectroscope provides further insight into perfor-

gories, the basic building block on which Spectroscope
operates, are constructed. Section 4.2 describes Spectroscope’s support for comparing request flows.

4.1

Comparing request flows

Categorizing request flows

Even small distributed systems can service hundreds to
thousands of requests per second, so comparing all of
them individually is not feasible. Instead, exploiting
a general expectation that requests that take the same
path should incur similar costs, Spectroscope groups
identically-structured requests into unique categories
and uses them as the basic unit for comparing request
flows. For example, requests whose structures are identical because they hit in a NFS server’s data and metadata
cache will be grouped into the same category, whereas
requests that miss in both will be grouped in a different one. Two requests are deemed structurally identical
if their string representations, as determined by a depthfirst traversal, are identical. For requests with parallel
substructures, Spectroscope computes all possible string
representations when determining the category in which
to bin them. The exponential cost is mitigated by imposing an order on parallel substructures (i.e., by always
traversing them in alphabetical order, as determined by
their root node names) and by the fact that parallelism is
limited in most request flows we have observed.
For each category, Spectroscope identifies aggregate
statistics, including request count, average response
3

Problem
Non.problem
period period
graphsgrap

positives, perhaps the worst failure mode due to developer effort wasted, whenever possible.

Probl period
Problem
graphs
period graphs

5.1

When comparing two periods, there will always be some
natural differences in timings. Spectroscope uses the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov two-sample, non-parametric hypothesis test [20] to differentiate natural variance from
true changes in distribution or behaviour. Statistical hypothesis tests take as input two distributions and output
a p-value, which represents uncertainty in the claim that
the null hypothesis, that both distributions are the same,
is false. Expensive false positives are limited to a preset
rate (almost always 5%) by rejecting the null hypothesis only when the p-value is lower than this value. The
p-value increases with variance and decreases with the
number of samples. A non-parametric test, which does
not require knowledge of the underlying distribution, is
used because we have observed that response times are
not governed by well-known distributions.
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is used as follows. For
each category, the distributions of response times for
the non-problem period and the problem period are extracted and input into the hypothesis test. The category
is marked as containing response-time mutations if the
test rejects the null hypothesis. By default, categories
that contain too few requests to run the test accurately
are not marked as containing mutations. To identify the
components or interactions responsible for the mutation,
Spectroscope extracts the critical path, i.e., the path of
the request on which response time depends, and runs
the same hypothesis test on the edge latency distributions. Edges for which the null hypothesis is rejected
are marked in red in the final output visualization.

Categorization

Response.time
mutation
identiﬁcation

Structural mutation
and precursor
identiﬁcation

Ranking

Ranked list of categories
containing mutations

Visualization
layer

1. Structural
2. Response time
3. ...

Low.level
difference
identiﬁcation

Figure 3: Spectroscope’s workflow for comparing request
flows. First, Spectroscope groups requests from both periods
into categories. Second, it identifies which categories contain
mutations or precursors. Third, it ranks mutation categories
according to their expected contribution to the performance
change. Developers are presented this ranked list. Visualizations of mutations and their precursors can be shown. Also,
low-level differences can be identified for them.

mance changes by identifying the low-level parameters
(e.g., client parameters or function call parameters) that
best differentiate a chosen mutation and its precursors.
For example, in Ursa Minor, one performance slowdown, which manifested as many structural mutations,
was caused by a change in a parameter sent by the client.
For problems like this, highlighting the specific low-level
differences can immediately identify the root cause.
Section 5 describes Spectroscope’s algorithms and
heuristics for identifying mutations, their corresponding
precursors, their rank based on their relative influence
on the overall performance change, and their most relevant low-level parameter differences. It also describes
how these methods overcome key challenges, for example, differentiating true mutations from natural variance in request structure and timings. Identification of
response-time mutations and ranking rely on the expectation (reasonable for many distributed systems, including
distributed storage) that requests that take the same path
through a distributed system will exhibit similar response
times and edge latencies. Section 7 describes how high
variance in this axis affects Spectroscope’s results.

5

Identifying response-time mutations

5.2

Identifying structural mutations

To identify structural mutations, Spectroscope assumes a
similar workload was run in both the non-problem period
and the problem period. As such, it is reasonable to expect that an increase in the number of requests that take
one path through the distributed system in the problem
period should correspond to a decrease in the number of
requests that take other paths. Since non-determinism
in service order dictates that per-category counts will always vary slightly between periods, a threshold is used
to identify categories that contain structural mutations
and precursors. Categories that contain SM THRESHOLD
more requests from the problem period than from the
non-problem period are labeled as containing mutations
and those that contain SM THRESHOLD fewer are labeled
as containing precursors.
Choosing a good threshold for a workload may require
some experimentation, as it is sensitive to both the number of requests issued and the sampling rate. Fortunately,

Algorithms for comparing request flows

This section describes the key heuristics and algorithms
used when comparing request flows. In creating them,
we favoured simplicity and those that regulate false
4

it is easy to run Spectroscope multiple times, and it is not
necessary to get the threshold exactly right, choosing a
value that is too small will result in more false positives,
but they will be given a low rank and so will not mislead
the developer in his diagnosis efforts.

Read

If per-category distributions of request counts are
available, a statistical test, instead of a threshold, could
be used to determine those categories that contain mutations or precursors. This statistical approach would
be superior to a threshold-based approach, as it guarantees a set false-positive rate. However, building the
distributions necessary would require obtaining many
non-problem and problem-period datasets, so we opted
for the simpler threshold-based approach instead. Also,
our experiences at Google indicate that request structure
within large datacenters may change too quickly for such
expensive-to-build models to be useful.

5.3

Precursor categories

Mutation

Read

Read

Read

NP: 300
P: 200

Lookup

NP: 650
P: 100
ReadDir

NP: 700
P: 1,000
NP: 550
P: 150

NP: 1,100
P: 600

NP: 200
P: 100

Figure 4: How the precursor categories of a structuralmutation category are identified. One structural-mutation
category and five precursor categories are shown, each with
their corresponding request counts from the non-problem (NP)
and problem (P) periods. For this case, the shaded precursor
categories will be identified as those that could have donated
requests to the structural-mutation category. The precursor categories that contain LOOKUP and READDIR requests cannot
have donated requests because their constituent requests are not
READS . The top left-most precursor category contains READS ,
but the 1:N heuristic eliminates it.

Mapping mutations to precursors

Once the total set of categories that contain structural
mutations and precursors has been identified, Spectroscope must iterate through each structural-mutation category to determine the precursor categories that are likely
to have donated requests to it. This is accomplished via
three heuristics, described below. Figure 4 shows how
they are applied.
First, the total list of precursor categories is pruned to
eliminate categories with a different root node than those
in the structural-mutation category. The root node describes the overall type of a request, for example READ,
WRITE , or READDIR, and requests of different high-level
types should not be precursor/mutation pairs.

5.4

Ranking

Ranking of mutations is necessary for two reasons.
First, the performance problem might have multiple root
causes, each of which causes its own set of mutations.
Second, even if there is only one root cause to the problem (e.g., a misconfiguration), many mutations will often
still be observed. For both cases, it is useful to identify
the mutations that most affect performance in order to focus diagnosis effort where it will yield the most benefit.
Spectroscope ranks categories that contain mutations
in descending order by their expected contribution to the
performance change. The contribution for a structuralmutation category is calculated as the number of mutations it contains, which is the difference between its
problem and non-problem period counts, multiplied by
the difference in problem period average response time
between it and its precursor categories. If more than
one candidate precursor category has been identified, a
weighted average of their average response times is used;
weights are based on structural similarity to the mutation. The contribution for a response-time-mutation category is calculated as the number of mutations it contains, which is just the non-problem period count, times
the change in average response time of that category be-

Second, remaining precursor categories that have decreased in request count less than the increase in request count of the structural-mutation category are also
removed from consideration. This 1:N heuristic reflects
the common case that one precursor category is likely to
donate requests to N structural-mutation categories. For
example, a cache-related problem may result in a portion
of requests that used to hit in that cache to miss and hit
in the next-level cache. Extra cache pressure at this nextlevel cache may result in the rest missing in both caches.
This heuristic can be optionally disabled.
Third, the remaining precursor categories are ranked
according to their likelihood of having donated requests,
as determined by the string-edit distance between them
and the structural-mutation category. This heuristic reflects the intuition that precursors and structural mutations are likely to resemble each other in structure. The
cost of computing the edit distance is O(NM), where N
and M are the lengths of the string representations of the
categories being compared.
5

tween the periods. If a category contains both responsetime mutations and structural mutations, it is split into
two virtual categories and each is ranked separately.

5.5

caused by contention, they cannot directly attribute them
to the responsible process. In some cases our techniques
can indirectly help, for example, by showing that many
edges within a component are responsible for a responsetime mutation, they can help the developer intuit that the
problem is due to contention with an external process.
Diagnosing problems when the load differs significantly between periods: In such cases, the load change
itself may be the root cause. Though our techniques
will identify response-time and structural changes when
the load during the problem period is much greater than
the non-problem period, the developer must determine
whether they are reasonable degradations.

Identifying low-level differences

Identifying the differences in low-level parameters between a mutation and precursor can often help developers further localize the source of the problem. For example, the root cause of a response-time mutation might
be further localized by identifying that it is caused by a
component that is sending more data in its RPCs than
during the non-problem period.
Spectroscope allows developers to pick a mutation
category and candidate precursor category for which to
identify low-level differences. Given these categories,
Spectroscope induces a regression tree [5] showing the
low-level parameters that best separate requests in these
categories. Each path from root to leaf represents an
independent explanation of why the mutation occurred.
Since developers may already possess some intuition
about what differences are important, the process is
meant to be interactive. If the developer does not like
the explanations, he can select a new set by removing the
root parameter from consideration and re-running the algorithm.
The regression tree is induced as follows. First, a
depth-first traversal is used to extract a template describing the parts of request structures that are common between both categories, up until the first observed difference. Portions that are not common are excluded, since
low-level parameters cannot be compared for them.
Second, a table in which rows represent requests and
columns represent parameters is created by iterating
through each of the categories’ requests and extracting
parameters from the parts that fall within the template.
Each row is labeled as belonging to the problem or nonproblem period. Certain parameter values, such as the
thread ID and timestamp, must always be ignored, as
they are not expected to be similar across requests. Finally, the table is fed as input to the C4.5 algorithm [25],
which creates the regression tree. To reduce the runtime,
only parameters from a randomly sampled subset of requests are extracted from the database, currently a minimum of 100 and a maximum of 10%. Parameters only
need to be extracted the first time the algorithm is run;
subsequent iterations can modify the table directly.

5.6

6

Experimental apparatus

Most of the experiments and case studies reported in this
paper come from using Spectroscope with a distributed
storage service called Ursa Minor. Section 6.1 describes
this system. Section 6.2 describes the benchmarks used
for Ursa Minor’s nightly regression tests, the setting in
which many of the case studies were observed.
To understand issues in scaling request-flow comparison to larger systems, we also used Spectroscope to diagnose services within Google. Section 6.3 provides more
details. The implementation of Spectroscope for Ursa
Minor was written in Perl and MATLAB. It includes a
visualization layer built upon Prefuse [16]. The cost of
calculating edit distances dominates its runtime, so it is
sensitive to the value of SM THRESHOLD used. The implementation for Google was written in C++; its runtime is
much lower (on the order of seconds) and its visualization layer uses DOT [15].

6.1

Ursa Minor

Figure 5 illustrates Ursa Minor’s architecture. Like most
modern scalable distributed storage, Ursa Minor separates metadata services from data services, such that
clients can access data on storage nodes without moving it all through metadata servers. An Ursa Minor
instance (called a “constellation”) consists of potentially many NFS servers (for unmodified clients), storage nodes (SNs), metadata servers (MDSs), and end-toend-trace servers. To access data, clients must first send
a request to a metadata server asking for the appropriate permissions and locations of the data on the storage
nodes. Clients can then access the storage nodes directly.
Ursa Minor has been in active development since 2004
and comprises about 230,000 lines of code. More than 20
graduate students and staff have contributed to it over its
lifetime. More details about its implementation can be
found in Abd-El-Malek et al. [1].
The components of Ursa Minor are usually run on separate machines within a datacenter. Though Ursa Minor
supports an arbitrary number of components, the experi-

Current limitations

This section describes current limitations with our techniques for comparing request flows.
Diagnosing problems caused by contention: Our
techniques assume that performance changes are caused
by changes to the system (code changes, configuration changes, etc). Though they will identify mutations
6

ates the small file performance of storage systems [19].
It utilizes 448 subdirectories, 50,000 transactions, and
200,000 files and runs for 80 minutes. The average graph
size and standard deviation is 66 and 65 nodes. The percategory equivalents are 190 and 81 nodes.
SPEC SFS 97 V3.0 (SFS97): This synthetic benchmark is the industry standard for measuring NFS server
scalability and performance [30]. It applies a periodically increasing load of NFS operations to a storage
system’s NFS server and measures the average response
time. It was configured to generate load between 50 and
350 operations/second in increments of 50 ops/second
and runs for 90 minutes. The average graph size and
standard deviation is 30 and 51 nodes. The per-category
equivalents are 206 and 200 nodes.
IoZone: This benchmark [23] sequentially writes, rewrites, reads, and re-reads a 5GB file in 20 minutes. The
average graph size and standard deviation is 6 nodes. The
per-category equivalents are 61 and 82 nodes.

Metadata Server
Application
Data
request

s

es

c
ac

a
at
ad
t
ccess
e
M Data a

SN

NFS Server
Trace Server
Figure 5: Ursa Minor Architecture. Ursa Minor can be
deployed in many configurations, with an arbitrary number of
NFS servers, metadata servers, storage nodes (SNs), and trace
servers. Here, a simple five-component configuration is shown.

ments and case studies detailed in this paper use a simple
five-machine configuration: one NFS server, one metadata server, one trace server, and two storage nodes. One
storage node stores data, while the other stores metadata.
Not coincidentally, this is the configuration used in the
nightly regression tests that uncovered many of the problems described in the case studies.
End-to-end tracing infrastructure via Stardust:
Ursa Minor’s Stardust tracing infrastructure is much like
its peer group, discussed in Section 2. Request sampling
is used to capture trace data for a subset of entire requests
(10% by default), with a per-request decision made randomly when the request enters the system. Ursa Minor
contains approximately 200 trace points, 124 manually
inserted as well as automatically generated ones for each
RPC send and receive function. In addition to simple
trace points, which indicate points reached in the code,
explicit split and join trace points are used to identify the
start and end of concurrent threads of activity. Low-level
parameters are also collected at trace points.

6.2

6.3

Dapper & Google services

The Google services for which Spectroscope was applied were instrumented using Dapper, which automatically embeds trace points in Google’s RPC framework.
Like Stardust, Dapper employs request sampling, but
uses a sampling rate of less than 0.1%. Spectroscope
was implemented as an extension to Dapper’s aggregation pipeline, which groups individual requests into categories and was originally written to support Dapper’s
pre-existing analysis tools. Categories created by the
aggregation pipeline only show compressed call graphs
with identical children and siblings merged together.

7

Dealing with high-variance categories

For automated diagnosis tools to be useful, it is important
that distributed systems satisfy certain properties about
variance. For Spectroscope, categories that exhibit high
variance in response times and edge latencies do not satisfy the expectation that “requests that take the same path
should incur similar costs” and can affect its ability to
identify mutations accurately. Spectroscope’s ability to
identify response-time mutations is sensitive to variance,
whereas for structural mutations only the ranking is affected. Though categories may exhibit high variance intentionally (for example, due to a scheduling algorithm
that minimizes mean response time at the expense of
variance), many do so unintentionally, as a result of latent
performance problems. For example, in early versions
of Ursa Minor, several high-variance categories resulted
from a poorly written hash table that exhibited slowly increasing lookup times because of a poor hashing scheme.
For response-time mutations, both false negatives
and false positives will increase with the number of
high-variance categories. False negatives will increase

Benchmarks used with Ursa Minor

Experiments run on Ursa Minor use these benchmarks.
Linux-build and ursa minor-build: These benchmarks consist of two phases: a copy phase, in which the
source tree is tarred and copied to Ursa Minor and then
untarred, and a build phase, in which the source files
are compiled. Linux-build (of 2.6.32 kernel) runs for
26 minutes. About 145,000 requests are sampled. The
average graph size and standard deviation is 12 and 40
nodes. Most graphs are small, but some are very big,
so the per-category equivalents are larger: 160 and 500
nodes. Ursa minor-build runs for 10 minutes. About
16,000 requests are sampled and the average graph size
and standard deviation is 9 and 28 nodes. The percategory equivalents are 96 and 100 nodes.
Postmark-large: This synthetic benchmark evalu7

it can help developers identify the root cause immediately, or at least localize the problem to a specific area
of the system. In other cases, it can help eliminate the
distributed system as the root cause by verifying that its
behaviour has not changed, allowing developers to focus
their efforts on external factors.
This section presents diagnoses of six performance
problems solved by using Spectroscope to compare request flows and analyzes its effectiveness in identifying
the root causes. Most of these problems were previously
unsolved and diagnosed by the authors without knowledge of the root cause. One problem was observed before
Spectroscope was available, so it was re-injected to show
how effectively it could have been diagnosed. By introducing a synthetic spin loop of different delays, we also
demonstrate Spectroscope’s ability to diagnose changes
in response time.

because high variance will reduce the KolmogorovSmirnov test’s power to differentiate true behaviour
changes from natural variance. False positives, which are
much rarer, will increase when it is valid for categories to
exhibit similar response times within a single period, but
different response times across different ones. The rest
of this section concentrates on the false negative case.
To quantify how well categories meet the same
path/similar costs expectation within a single period,
Figure 6 shows a CDF of the squared coefficient of variation in response time (C2 ) for large categories induced
by linux-build, postmark-large, and SFS97 in Ursa
Minor. Figure 7 shows the same C2 CDF for large categories induced by Bigtable [8] running in three Google
datacenters over a 1-day period. Each Bigtable instance
is shared among the machines in its datacenter and services several workloads. C2 is a normalized measure of
variance and is defined as ( σµ )2 . Distributions with C2
less than one exhibit low variance, whereas those with C2
greater than one exhibit high variance. Large categories
contain more than 10 requests; Tables 1 and 2 show that
they account for only 15–45% of all categories, but contain more than 98% of all requests. Categories containing fewer requests are not included, since their smaller
sample size makes the C2 statistic unreliable for them.
For the benchmarks run on Ursa Minor, at least 88%
of the large categories exhibit low variance. C2 for all
the categories generated by postmark-large is small.
More than 99% of its categories exhibit low variance and
the maximum C2 value observed is 6.88. The results for
linux-build and SFS97 are slightly more heavy-tailed.
For linux-build, 96% of its categories exhibit low variance, and the maximum C2 value is 394. For SFS97,
88% exhibit C2 less than 1, and the maximum C2 value
is 50.3. Analysis of categories in the large tail of these
benchmarks show that part of the observed variance is a
result of contention for locks in the metadata server.
The traces collected for Bigtable by Dapper are relatively sparse, often graphs generated for it are composed of only a few nodes, with one node showing the
incoming call type (e.g., READ, MUTATE, etc.) and another showing the call type of the resulting GFS [13] request. As such, many dissimilar paths cannot be disambiguated and have been merged together in the observed
categories. Even so, 47–69% of all categories exhibit C2
less than 1. Additional instrumentation, such as those
that show the sizes of Bigtable data requests and work
done within GFS, would serve to further disambiguate
unique paths and considerably reduce C2 .

8

8.1

Methodology

Three complementary metrics are provided for evaluating Spectroscope’s output.
The percentage of the 10 highest-ranked categories
that are relevant: This metric measures the quality of
the rankings of the results. It accounts for the fact that
developers will naturally investigate the highest-ranked
categories first, so it is important for them to be relevant.
The percentage of false-positive categories: This
metric evaluates the quality of the ranked list by identifying the percentage of all results that are not relevant.
Request coverage: This metric evaluates quality of
the ranked list by identifying the percentage of requests
affected by the problem that are identified in it.
Table 3 summarizes Spectroscope’s performance using these metrics. Unless otherwise noted, a default
value of 50 was used for SM THRESHOLD. We chose this
value to yield reasonable runtimes (between 15-30 minutes) when diagnosing problems in larger benchmarks,
such as SFS97 and postmark-large. When necessary,
it was lowered to further explore the space of possible
structural mutations.

8.2

MDS configuration change

After a particular large code check-in, performance of
postmark-large decayed significantly, from 46tps to
28tps. To diagnose this problem, we used Spectroscope to compare request flows between two runs of
postmark-large, one from before the check-in and one
from after. The results showed many categories that contained structural mutations. Comparing them to their
most-likely precursor categories revealed that the storage node utilized by the metadata server had changed.
Before the check-in, the metadata server wrote metadata
only to its dedicated storage node. After the check-in, it
issued most writes to the data storage node instead. We

Ursa Minor case studies

Spectroscope is not designed to replace developers;
rather it is intended to serve as an important step in the
workflow they use to diagnose problems. Sometimes
8

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

CDF

CDF

1

0.4
Postmark−large
Linux−build
SFS97

0.2
0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Datacenter A
Datacenter B
Datacenter C

0.4
0.2
0

1

C2 for large categories induced by each benchmark

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

C2 for large categories induced by Bigtable

Figure 6: CDF of C2 for large categories induced by three
benchmarks run on Ursa Minor. At least 88% of the categories induced by each benchmark exhibit low variance (C2 <
1). The results for linux-build and SFS are more heavy-tailed
than postmark-large, partly due to extra lock contention in
the metadata server.

Figure 7: CDF of C2 for large categories induced by
Bigtable instances in three Google datacenters. Dapper’s instrumentation of Bigtable is sparse, so many paths cannot be
disambiguated and have been merged together in the observed
categories, resulting in a higher C2 than otherwise expected.
Even so, 47–69% of categories exhibit low variance.
Google datacenter

Benchmark
Linux-bld

Postmark

SFS97

Categories
Large categories (%)

351
25.3

716
29.9

1602
14.7

Requests sampled
In large categories (%)

145,167
99.7

131,113
99.2

210,669
98.9

A

B

C

Categories
Large categories (%)

29
32.6

24
45.2

17
26.9

Requests sampled
In large categories (%)

7,088
97.7

5,556
98.8

2,079
93.1

Table 1: Distribution of requests in the categories induced
by three benchmarks run on Ursa Minor. Though many categories are generated, most contain only a small number of requests. Large categories, which contain more than 10 requests,
account for between 15–29% of all categories generated, but
contain over 99% of all requests.

Table 2: Distribution of requests in the categories induced
by three instances of Bigtable over a 1-day period. Fewer
categories and requests are observed than for Ursa Minor, because Dapper samples less than 0.1% of all requests. The distribution of requests within categories is similar to Ursa Minor, a
small number of categories contain most requests.

also used Spectroscope to identify the low-level parameter differences between a few structural-mutation categories and their corresponding precursor categories. The
regression tree found differences in elements of the data
distribution scheme (e.g., type of fault tolerance used).
We presented this information to the developer of the
metadata server, who told us the root cause was a change
in an infrequently-modified configuration file. Along
with the check-in, he had mistakenly removed a few
lines that pre-allocated the file used to store metadata and
specify the data distribution. Without this, Ursa Minor
used its default distribution scheme and sent all writes to
the data storage node. The developer was surprised to
learn that the default distribution scheme differed from
the one he had chosen in the configuration file.
Summary: For this real problem, comparing request flows helped developers diagnose a performance
change caused by modifications to the system configuration. Many distributed systems contain large configuration files with esoteric parameters (e.g., hadoop-site.xml)

that, if modified, can result in perplexing performance
changes. Spectroscope can provide guidance in such
cases by showing how various configuration options affect system behaviour.
Quantitative analysis: For the evaluation in Table 3,
results in the ranked list were deemed relevant if they
included metadata accesses to the data storage node with
a most-likely precursor category that included metadata
accesses to the metadata storage node.

8.3

Read-modify-writes

This problem was observed and diagnosed before development on Spectroscope began; it was re-injected in Ursa
Minor to show how Spectroscope could have helped developers easily diagnose it.
A few years ago, performance of IoZone declined
from 22MB/s to 9MB/s after upgrading the Linux kernel from 2.4.22 to 2.6.16.11. To debug this problem,
one of the authors of this paper spent several days manually mining Stardust traces and eventually discovered the
9

Quality of results
# / Type

Name

Manifestation

Root cause

8.2 / Real
8.3 / Real
8.4 / Real
8.4 / Real
8.5 / Real
8.6 / Synthetic
8.6 / Synthetic
8.6 / Synthetic
8.7 / Real

MDS config.
RMWs
MDS prefetch. 50
MDS prefetch. 10
Create behaviour
100µs delay
500µs delay
1ms delay
Periodic spikes

Structural
Structural
Structural

Config. change
Env. change
Internal change

Structural
Response time

Design problem
Internal change

No change

Env. change

# of
results

Top 10
rel. (%)

FPs (%)

Cov. (%)

128
3
7
16
11
17
166
178
N/A

100
100
29
70
40
0
100
100
N/A

2
0
71
56
64
100
6
7
N/A

70
100
93
96
N/A
0
92
93
N/A

Table 3: Overview of the Ursa Minor case studies. This table shows information about each of six problems diagnosed using
Spectroscope. For most of the case studies, quantitative metrics that evaluate the quality of Spectroscope’s results are included.

tended to improve performance by prefetching metadata
to clients on every mandatory metadata server access, in
hopes of minimizing the total number of accesses necessary. However, when implemented, this feature provided
no improvement. The developers spent a few weeks (off
and on) trying to understand the reason for this unexpected result but eventually moved on to other projects
without an answer.
To diagnose this problem, we compared two runs of
linux-build, one with prefetching disabled and another
with it enabled. linux-build was chosen because it
is more likely to see performance improvements due to
prefetching than the other workloads.
When we ran Spectroscope with SM THRESHOLD set
to 50, several categories were identified as containing mutations. The two highest-ranked results immediately piqued our interest, as they contained WRITEs
that exhibited an abnormally large number of lock acquire/release accesses within the metadata server. All
of the remaining results contained response-time mutations from regressions in the metadata prefetching code
path, which had not been properly maintained. To further
explore the space of structural mutations, we decreased
SM THRESHOLD to 10 and re-ran Spectroscope. This time,
many more results were identified; most of the highestranked ones now exhibited an abnormally high number
of lock accesses and differed only in the exact number.
Analysis revealed that the additional lock/unlock calls
reflected extra work performed by requests that accessed
the metadata server to prefetch metadata to clients. To
verify this as the root cause, we added instrumentation
around the prefetching function to see whether it caused
the database accesses. Altogether, this information provided us with the intuition necessary to determine why
server-driven metadata prefetching did not improve performance: the extra time spent in the DB calls by metadata server accesses outweighed the time savings gener-

root cause: the new kernel’s NFS client was no longer
honouring the NFS server’s preferred READ and WRITE
I/O sizes, which were set to 16KB. The smaller I/O sizes
used by the new kernel forced the NFS server to perform many read-modify-writes (RMWs), which severely
affected performance. To remedy this issue, support for
smaller I/O sizes was added to the NFS server and counters were added to track the frequency of RMWs.
To show how comparing request flows and identifying
low-level parameter differences could have helped developers quickly identify the root cause, Spectroscope was
used to compare request flows between a run of IoZone
in which the Linux client’s I/O size was set to 16KB
and another during which the Linux client’s I/O size was
set to 4KB. All of the results in the ranked list were
structural-mutation categories that contained RMWs.
We next used Spectroscope to identify the low-level
parameter differences between the highest-ranked result
and its most-likely precursor category. The output perfectly separated the constituent requests by the count parameter, which specifies the amount of data to be read or
written by the request. Specifically, requests with count
parameter values less than or equal to 4KB were classified as belonging to the problem period.
Summary: Diagnosis of this problem demonstrates
how comparing request flows can help developers identify performance problems that arise due to a workload
change. It also showcases the utility of highlighting relevant low-level parameter differences.
Quantitative analysis: For Table 3, results in the
ranked list were deemed relevant if they contained
RMWs and their most-likely precursor category did not.

8.4

MDS prefetching

A few years ago, several developers, including one of
the authors of this paper, tried to add server-driven metadata prefetching to Ursa Minor [17]. This feature was in10

have shown that the root cause was excessive metadata
server/storage node interaction.
Quantitative analysis: For Table 3, results in the
ranked list were deemed relevant if they contained structural mutations and showed more interactions between
the NFS server and metadata server than their mostlikely precursor category. Response-time mutations that
showed expected performance differences due to load are
considered false positives. Coverage is not reported as it
is not clear how to define problematic CREATEs.

ated by the increase in client cache hits.
Summary: This problem demonstrates how comparing request flows can help developers account for unexpected performance loss when adding new features.
In this case, the problem was due to unanticipated contention several layers of abstraction below the feature addition. Note that diagnosis with Spectroscope is interactive, in this case involving developers iteratively modifying SM THRESHOLD to gain additional insight.
Quantitative analysis: For Table 3, results in the
ranked list were deemed relevant if they contained at
least 30 LOCK ACQUIRE → LOCK RELEASE edges. Results for the output when SM THRESHOLD was set to 10
and 50 are reported. In both cases, response-time mutations caused by decay of the prefetching code path are
conservatively considered false positives, since these regressions were not the focus of this diagnosis effort.

8.5

8.6

Slowdown due to code changes

This synthetic problem was injected into Ursa Minor to
show how request-flow comparison can be used to diagnose slowdowns due to feature additions or regressions
and to assess Spectroscope’s sensitivity to changes in response time.
Spectroscope was used to compare request flows between two runs of SFS97. Problem period runs included
a spin loop injected into the storage nodes’ WRITE code
path. Any WRITE request that accessed a storage node incurred this extra delay, which manifested in edges of the
form ⋆ → STORAGE NODE RPC REPLY. Normally, these
edges exhibit a latency of 100µs.
Table 3 shows results from injecting 100µs, 500µs, and
1ms spin loops. Results were deemed relevant if they
contained response-time mutations and correctly identified the affected edges as those responsible. For the latter
two cases, Spectroscope was able to identify the resulting response-time mutations and localize them to the affected edges. Of the categories identified, only 6–7% are
false positives and 100% of the 10 highest-ranked ones
are relevant. The coverage is 92% and 93%.
Variance in response times and the edge latencies in
which the delay manifests prevent Spectroscope from
properly identifying the affected categories for the 100µs
case. It identifies 11 categories that contain requests that
traverse the affected edges multiple times as containing

Create behaviour

During development of Ursa Minor, we noticed that
the distribution of request response times for CREATEs
in postmark-large increased significantly during the
course of the benchmark. To diagnose this performance
degradation, we used Spectroscope to compare request
flows between the first 1,000 CREATEs issued and the
last 1,000. Due to the small number of requests compared, SM THRESHOLD was set to 10.
Spectroscope’s results showed categories that contained both structural and response-time mutations, with
the highest-ranked one containing the former. The
response-time mutations were the expected result of data
structures in the NFS server and metadata server whose
performance decreased linearly with load. Analysis of
the structural mutations, however, revealed two architectural issues, which accounted for the degradation.
First, to serve a CREATE, the metadata server executed
a tight inter-component loop with a storage node. Each
iteration of the loop required a few milliseconds, greatly
affecting response times. Second, categories containing
structural mutations executed this loop more times than
their precursor categories. This inter-component loop
can be seen easily if the categories are zoomed out to
show only component traversals and plotted in a train
schedule, as in Figure 8.
Conversations with the metadata server’s developer
led us to the root cause: recursive B-Tree page splits
needed to insert the new item’s metadata. To ameliorate
this problem, the developer increased the page size and
changed the scheme used to pick the created item’s key.
Summary: This problem demonstrates how requestflow comparison can be used to diagnose performance
degradations, in this case due to a long-lived design
problem. Though simple counters could have shown
that CREATEs were very expensive, they would not

A

*

*: Metadata insertion

B
C
D
0ms Time 4ms 0ms

Time

13ms

Figure 8: Visualization of create behaviour. Two trainschedule visualizations are shown, the first one a fast early create during postmark-large and the other a slower create issued later in the benchmark. Messages are exchanged between
the NFS Server (A), Metadata Server (B), Metadata Storage
Node (C), and Data Storage Node (D). The first phase of the
create procedure is metadata insertion, which is shown to be
responsible for the majority of the delay.

11

response-time mutations, but is unable to assign those
edges as the ones responsible for the slowdown.

A:

...

8.7

B:

...

Periodic spikes

Ursa minor-build, which is run as part of the nightly
test suite, periodically shows a spike in the time required
for its copy phase to complete. For example, from one
particular night to another, copy time increased from 111
seconds to 150 seconds, an increase of 35%. We initially
suspected that the problem was due to an external process that periodically ran on the same machines as Ursa
Minor’s components. To verify this assumption, we compared request flows between a run in which the spike was
observed and another in which it was not.
Surprisingly, Spectroscope’s output contained only
one result: GETATTRs, which were issued more frequently during the problem period, but which had not
increased in average response time. We ruled this result
out as the cause of the problem, as NFS’s cache coherence policy suggests that an increase in the frequency
of GETATTRs is the result of a performance change,
not its cause. We probed the issue further by reducing
SM THRESHOLD to see if the problem was due to requests
that had changed only a small amount in frequency, but
greatly in response time, but did not find any such cases.
Finally, to rule out the improbable case that the problem was caused by an increase in variance of response
times that did not affect the mean, we compared distributions of intra-category variance between two periods using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test; the resulting p-value
was 0.72, so the null hypothesis was not rejected. These
observations convinced us the problem was not due to
Ursa Minor or processes running on its machines.
We next suspected the client machine as the cause of
the problem and verified this to be the case by plotting a
timeline of request arrivals and response times as seen by
the NFS server (Figure 9). The visualization shows that
during the problem period, response times stay constant
but the arrival rate of requests decreases. We currently
suspect the problem to be backup activity initiated from
the facilities department (i.e., outside of our system).
Summary: This problem demonstrates how comparing request flows can help diagnose problems that are not
caused by internal changes. Informing developers that
nothing within the distributed system has changed frees
them to focus their efforts on external factors.

9

0s

Time

5s

Figure 9: Timeline of inter-arrival times of requests at the
NFS Server. A 5s sample of requests, where each rectangle
represents the process time of a request, reveals long periods of
inactivity due to lack of requests from the client during spiked
copy times (B) compared to periods of normal activity (A).

9.1

Inter-cluster performance

A team responsible for an internal service at Google observed that load tests run on their software in two different clusters exhibited significantly different performance, though they expected performance to be similar.
We used Spectroscope to compare request flows between the two load test instances. The results showed
many categories that contained response-time mutations;
many were caused by latency changes not only within
the service itself, but also within RPCs and within several dependencies, such as the shared Bigtable instance
running in the lower-performing cluster. This led us to
hypothesize that the primary cause of the slowdown was
a problem in the cluster in which the slower load test
was run. Later, we found out that the Bigtable instance
running in the slower cluster was not working properly,
confirming our hypothesis. This experience is a further
example of how comparing request flows can help developers rule out the distributed system (in this case, a
specific Google service) as the cause of the problem.

9.2

Performance change in a large service

To help identify performance problems, Google keeps
per-day records of average request latencies for major
services. Spectroscope was used to compare two daylong periods for one such service, which exhibited a significant performance deviation, but only a small difference in load, between the periods compared. Though
many interesting mutations were identified, we were unable to identify the root cause due to our limited knowledge of the service, highlighting the importance of domain knowledge in interpreting Spectroscope’s results.

9.3

Experiences at Google

Ongoing challenges with scale

Challenges remain in scaling request-flow comparison
techniques to large distributed services, such as those
within Google. For example, categories generated for
well-instrumented large-scale distributed services will be
much larger than those observed for the 5-instance version of Ursa Minor. Additionally, they may yield many
categories, each populated with too few requests for sta-

This section describes preliminary experiences using
request-flow comparison, as implemented in Spectroscope, to diagnose performance problems within select
Google services. Sections 9.1 and 9.2 describe two such
experiences. Section 9.3 discusses ongoing challenges in
adapting request-flow comparison to large datacenters.
12

tistical rigor. Robust methods are needed to merge categories and visualize them without losing important information about structure, which occurs with Dapper because of its graph compression methods. These methods affected the quality of Spectroscope’s results by increasing variance, losing important structural differences
between requests, and increasing effort needed to understand individual categories. Our experiences with unsupervised learning algorithms, such as clustering [4, 29],
for merging categories indicate they are inadequate. A
promising alternative is to use semi-supervised methods,
which would allow the grouping algorithm to learn developers’ mental models of which categories should be
merged. Also, efficient visualization may be possible by
only showing the portion of a mutation’s structure that
differs between it and its precursors.
More generally, request-flow graphs from large services are difficult to understand because such services
contain many dependencies, most of which are foreign
to their developers. To help, tools such as Spectroscope
must strive to identify the semantic meaning of individual categories. For example, they could ask developers to
name graph substructures about which they are knowledgeable and combine them into a meaningful metaname when presenting categories.

10

actual behaviour observed in end-to-end traces. Theoretically, Pip can be used to diagnose any type of problem:
anomalies, correctness problems, etc. But, it relies on developers to specify expectations, which is a daunting and
error-prone task, the developer is faced with balancing
effort and generality against the specificity needed to expose particular problems. In addition, Pip’s componentcentric expectations, as opposed to request-centric ones,
complicate problem localization tasks [10]. Nonetheless,
in many ways, comparing request flows between executions is akin to Pip, with developer-provided expectations
being replaced with the observed non-problem period behaviour. Many of our algorithms, such as for ranking
mutations and highlighting the differences, could be used
with Pip-style expectations as well.
The Stardust tracing infrastructure on which our implementation builds was originally designed to enable
performance models to be induced from observed system performance [32, 34]. Building on that initial work,
IRONmodel [33] developed approaches to detecting (and
correcting) violations of such models, which can indicate performance problems. In describing IRONmodel,
Thereska et al. also proposed that the specific nature of
how observed behaviour diverges from the model could
guide diagnoses, but they did not develop techniques for
doing so or explore the approach in depth.
A number of black-box diagnosis techniques have
been devised for systems that do not have the detailed
end-to-end tracing on which our approach to comparing
request flows relies. For example, Project 5 [2] infers
bottlenecks by observing messages passed between components. Comparison of performance metrics exhibited
by systems that should be doing the same work can also
identify misbehaving nodes [18, 24]. Such techniques
can be useful parts of a suite, but are orthogonal to the
contributions of this paper.
There are also many single-process diagnosis tools
that inform creation of techniques for distributed systems. For example, Delta analysis [36] compares multiple failing and non-failing runs to identify the most significant differences. OptiScope [22] compares the code
transformations made by different compilers to help developers identify important differences that affect performance. DARC [35] automatically profiles system calls to
identify the greatest sources of latency. Our work builds
on some concepts from such single-process techniques.

Related work

A number of techniques have been developed for diagnosing performance problems in distributed systems.
Whereas many rely on end-to-end tracing, others attempt
to infer request flows from existing data sources, such as
message send/receive events [27] or logs [38]. These latter techniques trade accuracy of re-constructed request
flows for ease of using existing monitoring mechanisms.
Other techniques rely on black-box metrics and are limited to localizing problems to individual machines.
Magpie [4], Pinpoint [9], WAP5 [27], and Xu [38],
all identify anomalous requests by finding rare ones that
differ greatly from others. In contrast, request-flow comparison identifies the changes in distribution between two
periods that most affect performance. Pinpoint also describes other ways to use end-to-end traces, including for
statistical regression testing, but does not describe how to
use them to compare request flows.
Google has developed several analysis tools for use
with Dapper [31]. Most relevant is the Service Inspector,
which shows graphs of the unique call paths observed to
a chosen function or component, along with the resulting
call tree below it, allowing developers to understand the
contexts in which the chosen item is used. Because the
item must be chosen beforehand, the Service Inspector is
not a good fit for problem localization tasks.
Pip [26] compares developer-provided, componentbased expectations of structural and timing behaviour to

11

Conclusion

Comparing request flows, as captured by end-to-end
traces, is a powerful new technique for diagnosing performance changes between two time periods or system
versions. Spectroscope’s algorithms for this comparison allow it to accurately identify and rank mutations
and identify their precursors, focusing attention on the
13

most important differences. Experiences with Spectroscope confirm its usefulness and efficacy.

Laboratory, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, May
2006. 10
[18] M. P. Kasick, et al. Black-box problem diagnosis in parallel file
systems. Conference on File and Storage Technologies. USENIX
Association, 2010. 13
[19] J. Katcher. PostMark: a new file system benchmark. Technical
report TR3022. Network Appliance, October 1997. 7
[20] F. J. Massey, Jr. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for goodness of
fit. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 46(253):66–
78, 1951. 4
[21] J. C. Mogul. Emergent (Mis)behavior vs. Complex Software Systems. EuroSys. ACM, 2006. 1
[22] T. Moseley, et al. OptiScope: performance accountability for
optimizing compilers. International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization. IEEE/ACM, 2009. 13
[23] W. Norcott and D. Capps. IoZone filesystem benchmark program,
2002. http://www.iozone.org. 7
[24] X. Pan, et al. Ganesha: black-box fault diagnosis for MapReduce
systems. Hot Metrics. ACM, 2009. 13
[25] J. R. Quinlan. Bagging, boosting and C4.5. 13th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence. AAAI Press, 1996. 6
[26] P. Reynolds, et al. Pip: Detecting the unexpected in distributed
systems. Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation. USENIX Association, 2006. 1, 13
[27] P. Reynolds, et al. WAP5: Black-box Performance Debugging for
Wide-Area Systems. International World Wide Web Conference.
ACM Press, 2006. 13
[28] R. R. Sambasivan, et al. Diagnosing performance problems by
visualizing and comparing system behaviours. Technical report
10–103. Carnegie Mellon University, February 2010. 2
[29] R. R. Sambasivan, et al. Categorizing and differencing system behaviours. Workshop on hot topics in autonomic computing (HotAC). USENIX Association, 2007. 3, 13
[30] SPEC SFS97 (2.0). http://www.spec.org/sfs97. 2, 7
[31] B. H. Sigelman, et al. Dapper, a large-scale distributed systems
tracing infrastructure. Technical report dapper-2010-1. Google,
April 2010. 1, 2, 13
[32] E. Thereska, et al. Informed data distribution selection in a selfpredicting storage system. International conference on autonomic
computing. IEEE, 2006. 13
[33] E. Thereska and G. R. Ganger. IRONModel: robust performance
models in the wild. ACM SIGMETRICS Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems. ACM, 2008. 1,
13
[34] E. Thereska, et al. Stardust: Tracking activity in a distributed
storage system. ACM SIGMETRICS Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems. ACM, 2006. 1, 2,
13
[35] A. Traeger, et al. DARC: Dynamic analysis of root causes of
latency distributions. ACM SIGMETRICS Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems. ACM, 2008. 13
[36] J. Tucek, et al. Triage: diagnosing production run failures at the
user’s site. ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles,
2007. 13
[37] E. R. Tufte. The visual display of quantitative information.
Graphics Press, Cheshire, Connecticut, 1983. 3
[38] W. Xu, et al. Detecting large-scale system problems by mining
console logs. ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles.
ACM, 2009. 13

Acknowledgements
We thank our shepherd (Lakshminarayanan Subramanian), the NSDI
reviewers, Brian McBarron, Michelle Mazurek, Matthew Wachs, and
Ariela Krevat for their insight and feedback. We thank the members
and companies of the PDL Consortium (including APC, EMC, Facebook, Google, Hewlett-Packard Labs, Hitachi, IBM, Intel, LSI, Microsoft Research, NEC Laboratories, NetApp, Oracle, Riverbed, Samsung, Seagate, STEC, Symantec, VMWare, and Yahoo! Labs) for their
interest, insights, feedback, and support. This research was sponsored
in part by a Google research award, NSF grants #CNS-0326453 and
#CCF-0621508, by DoE award DE-FC02-06ER25767, and by CyLab
under ARO grants DAAD19-02-1-0389 and W911NF-09-1-0273.

References
[1] M. Abd-El-Malek, et al. Ursa Minor: versatile cluster-based storage. Conference on File and Storage Technologies. USENIX
Association, 2005. 2, 6
[2] M. K. Aguilera, et al. Performance debugging for distributed
systems of black boxes. ACM Symposium on Operating System
Principles. ACM, 2003. 13
[3] Anonymous. Personal communication with Google Software Engineers, December 2010. 1
[4] P. Barham, et al. Using Magpie for request extraction and workload modelling. Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation. USENIX Association, 2004. 1, 2, 3, 13
[5] C. M. Bishop. Pattern recognition and machine learning, first
edition. Springer Science + Business Media, LLC, 2006. 6
[6] B. M. Cantrill, et al. Dynamic instrumentation of production systems. USENIX Annual Technical Conference. USENIX Association, 2004. 1
[7] A. Chanda, et al. Whodunit: Transactional profiling for multi-tier
applications. EuroSys. ACM, 2007. 1, 2
[8] F. Chang, et al. Bigtable: a distributed storage system for structured data. Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation. USENIX Association, 2006. 8
[9] M. Y. Chen, et al. Path-based failure and evolution management.
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation.
USENIX Association, 2004. 1, 2, 13
[10] R. Fonseca, et al. Experiences with tracing causality in networked
services. Internet Network Management Conference on Research
on Enterprise Networking. USENIX Association, 2010. 2, 13
[11] R. Fonseca, et al. X-Trace: a pervasive network tracing framework. Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation. USENIX Association, 2007. 1, 2
[12] GDB. http://www.gnu.org/software/gdb/. 1
[13] S. Ghemawat, et al. The Google file system. ACM Symposium
on Operating System Principles. ACM, 2003. 8
[14] S. L. Graham, et al. gprof: a call graph execution profiler. ACM
SIGPLAN Symposium on Compiler Construction. Published as
SIGPLAN Notices, 17(6):120–126, June 1982. 1
[15] Graphviz. http://www.graphviz.org. 6
[16] J. Heer, et al. Prefuse: a toolkit for interactive information visualization. Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2005. 6
[17] J. Hendricks, et al. Improving small file performance in objectbased storage. Technical report CMU-PDL-06-104. Parallel Data

14

